---
layout: post
title: Swift Experiments
---

[Swift](https://www.swift.org/) looks really good - strong-typed,
the API makes sense, first-class support for native, and now you can develop in Linux
as well. The disadvantage is that the produced binaries depend on Swift being installed,
which means that you need to install Swift wherever you plan to run your binary.
This blog shows how to install and develop Swift on Ubuntu 25.04 aarch64.

# Installing stuff

To start with Ubuntu 25.04, simply install Swift via apt:
```bash
$ sudo apt install swiftlang binutils-gold
```

The best way to develop in Swift is to use an IDE. You have three options:

- Using Intellij IDEA with the Swift plugin. Works very well but stops working in certain cases.
- Using VSCode with the Swift plugin. Works very well too, maybe a bit better than IDEA.
- Using XCode (MacOS only). This offers the best experience but requires MacOS.

To install install IDEA, run the following command; IDEA community edition is enough:
```bash
$ sudo snap install intellij-idea-community
```
Afterwards install the [Swift Support](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/22150-swift-support)
plugin by Joachim Ansong.

The plugin doesn't support navigating to certain classes (e.g. you can't
navigate to Foundation classes like String), but you can navigate to classes from your dependencies
and the autocompletion works quite well.

To use VSCode [follow this tutorial](https://www.swift.org/documentation/articles/getting-started-with-vscode-swift.html).
If you're on x86-64, you can install vscode via snap (`sudo snap install code`);
on arm64 you'll need to [download the deb package](https://code.visualstudio.com/Download)
then install it via `sudo dpkg -i`.

# Getting Started

You can follow the [Building a Command-line Tool](https://www.swift.org/getting-started/cli-swiftpm/)
tutorial to build and run a basic CLI app.

## Running

Open the terminal in Intellij and run `swift run`. You can also create a run configuration
in IDEA; a "Shell Script" works best:

* Execute: `Script text`
* Script text: `swift run`

Press `Ctrl+F10` to run the app.

## Troubleshooting

If you get this error while running `swift build` or `swift run`:
```
error: link command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see invocation)
clang-15: error: invalid linker name in argument '-fuse-ld=gold'
```
Make sure `binutils-gold` is installed on your machine.

## Working with files

Reading a file is easy: `main.swift`:
```swift
import Foundation
print(try String(contentsOfFile: "foo.txt"))
print(try FileManager.default.contentsOfDirectory(atPath: "/home"))
```

## Kotlin Koans, Testing, Example project

See the [Swift Experiments](https://github.com/mvysny/swift-experiments)
example app which demoes a Swift project which builds on Linux and MacOS,
on Swift 5.10 and uses XCTest framework for tests.

# About the language

Swift have several features which make it remarkably close to Kotlin:
multi-line strings, strings with interpolation, types (`Int`, `UInt`, etc),
optional types (`Int?`).
The lack of GC is a bit of a bummer, but the reference counting hopefully makes
up for it, and reference counting makes more sense in embedded environments such as
phones, arm SOCs and Apple Watches.

I don't get the exception mechanism: all the `try`/`try?` stuff, and that you need
to add `throws` to all functions... Yes, stack unwinding is expensive but exceptions
are thrown sparingly in Kotlin program, so it's an acceptable penalty. Also,
why `fatalError()` when you can just bubble the exception out of `main()`?
If I only use `fatalError()` (no `try/try?/throws`) and `try!` (when calling something
that `throws`), this prints the best stack trace on failure but won't call `defer{}` blocks.
On the other hand, using `try`+`throws` everywhere feels excessive and dumb.
Java exception mechanism and Kotlin's `use{}` is far superior.

`guard` looks weird: I like Kotlin's way of simply using the `?:` operator more:
```kotlin
val foo = "25".toIntOrNull() ?: return
```
more than Swift's
```swift
guard let name = Int("25") else { return }
```

Also, when I'm implementing `Sequence`, why can't my struct simply implement `Sequence<Foo>`
but instead I have to type in `typealias Element = Foo` within the struct body?

On the other hand, I quite love that a class can implement `Strideable`
and have automatic support for range iteration; `Hashable` is also great idea
which forces the structure to be explicitly marked to be eligible for `Set` or
`Dictionary`.

Also, how cool is that I can implement `sum()` on a list of all numeric types, just like this:
```swift
extension Collection where Element: AdditiveArithmetic {
    func sum() -> Element {
        reduce(Element.zero, +)
    }
}
```

Do I like Swift much more than [Go](../golang-sucks/), C, C++, Objective-C, Rust? Hell fucking yes -
simple to use, familiar and sensible language syntax.
More than [Dart](../on-dart/)? Yup - native binaries consume less memory (todo citation). 
More than Kotlin/Native? Now this is tough. At the moment,
probably yes - Kotlin/Native file support is barebones, and Kotlin/Native
binaries can't be built on arm64. More than Kotlin/JVM? Nope - JVM is rock-solid and
offers so much; but it's unfit for really limited embedded (anything that has less than 128mb of memory).
